Create candlestick visualization documentation (#1172)
timescale/docs: timescaledb/tutorials/grafana/visualizations/candlestick.md

The figure above shows the structure of a candlestick. A candlestick covers a
specific time interval, for example 5 minutes, 10 minutes, or 1 hour. For this
period, it plots four values:

* **Open**: The starting price
* **Close**: The closing price
* **High**: The highest price
* **Low**: The lowest price

A candlestick chart can show many candlesticks over time. This helps you see
patterns in the changing price of an asset. For example, you can tell whether an
asset is entering bullish or bearish territory, or whether its market activity is
topping or bottoming out.

## What you will learn
This tutorial shows you how to:

*   [Create candlestick aggregates with raw data](#create-a-candlestick-with-raw-data)

> *   [Include volume when querying with raw data](#include-volume-when-querying-from-raw-data)

Reviewer: Suggest renaming this because it's not entirely clear what the section is about from the heading alone. Maybe something like `Show transaction volume when querying with raw data`?

Author: done, thanks

*   [Include volume when querying with raw data](#Include-volume-when-querying-from-raw-data)

## Prerequisites
Before you begin, make sure you have:

* Installed [Grafana][install-grafana] version&nbsp;8.5 or higher
* Installed [TimescaleDB][install-timescale]
* Imported the stock trade data from the [Getting Started Tutorial][gsg-data]

> If you are new to Grafana, see the
> [Grafana tutorials][grafana-tutorials]
> to get familiar with creating your first dashboard and visualizations before you
> start.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are new to Grafana, see the [Grafana tutorials][grafana-tutorials]
to get familiar with creating your first dashboard and visualizations. Also
see [this tutorial on adding variables to Grafana][variables-tutorial].
```

The examples in this section use these variables and Grafana functions:
* `$symbol`: a variable used to filter results by stock symbols.
* `$__timeFrom()::timestamptz` & `$__timeTo()::timestamptz`:
  Grafana variables. You change the values of these variables by
  using the dashboard's date chooser when viewing your graph.
* `$bucket_interval`: the interval size to pass to the `time_bucket`
  function when aggregating data.

> To learn more about adding variables to Grafana, be sure to check out this tutorial
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Create a candlestick with raw data

> Once you have the data and completed the prerequisites, we can create a Candlestick visualization using the raw stock tick data in the table `stocks_real_time`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a candlestick visualization using the raw data in the table `stocks_real_time`.
```

>   1.  In the query editor, use this SQL to query a Candlestick dataset using specified bucket interval:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1.  In the query editor, use this SQL to query a Candlestick dataset. Use the variable `$bucket interval`
      for the time period covered by each candlestick.
```

      ```sql
      SELECT

>       time_bucket($bucket_interval, time) AS time,

Reviewer 2: Might look cleaner if we indent the SQL query.

Author: Done, thanks

      symbol,
      FIRST(price, time) AS "open",
      MAX(price) AS high,
      MIN(price) AS low,
      LAST(price, time) AS "close",
      FROM stocks_real_time
      WHERE symbol =  $symbol
      AND time > $__timeFrom()::timestamptz and time < $__timeTo()::timestamptz
      GROUP BY symbol;
      ```

>   1.  Click outside of the query editor/the refresh icon to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1.  Click outside of the query editor, or click the refresh icon to 
```

    AND time > $__timeFrom()::timestamptz and time < $__timeTo()::timestamptz
    GROUP BY symbol;
    ```
1.  Click outside of the query editor/the refresh icon to 
    update the Grafana chart.

> 

Reviewer: This may be a bit too trivial to include, but you are more familiar with Grafana than I am. Is it easy for people to get confused because they don't know that they need to refresh the chart?

Author: Yes, they won't know they need to refresh, cause you will think it automatically refreshes once you have an updated query

  1.  Grafana turns the query into a candlestick chart that 
      looks like this:

      <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/candlestick/1_min.png" alt="Screenshot of a candlestick chart in Grafana, showing the price distribution of $AMZN."/>

      In this first example, we set the $bucket_interval to 1-min, you can see the price of AMZN ranges between $2120 and $2200. This chart uses hyperfunctions to query the `stock_real_time` table, with a bucket interval of 1 minute. 

</procedure>

Retrieving this data took about 7+ seconds, over two weeks of data which is probably slower than most users would expect when analyzing data. This is where continuous aggregates are particularly useful for data-intensive, time-series applications. 

<img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://s3.amazonaws.com/assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/candlestick/raw_data_exec_time.png" alt="Screenshot of the Grafana query response."/>

<procedure>

>   With the use of the $bucket_interval variable, we are able to switch intervals. For example, switching to a 15-minute bucket interval gives you this data. 

Reviewer: Rather than breaking the same procedure into 2 pieces, I think it's best to move this aside after the entire procedure, in a paragraph that says "hey, you just did it this way, but caggs can make it faster! check them out!"

If you really want this information here, I'd just add it as a numbered step and join the entire thing into 1 procedure

<procedure>

> With the use of the $bucket_interval variable, we are able to switch intervals. For example, switching to a 15-minute bucket interval gives you this data. 
> 
>  1.  Switch your bucket interval to 15-min from the dropdown
>      
>      <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://s3.amazonaws.com/assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/candlestick/timebucket_dropdown.png" alt="Screenshot of the Grafana variable dropdown."/>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 1.  To change your candlesticks so they cover a different time interval, you can change the
     `$bucket_interval` variable. In the dropdown menu, switch your bucket interval
     to 15 minutes.
     
     <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://s3.amazonaws.com/assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/candlestick/timebucket_dropdown.png" alt="Screenshot of the Grafana variable dropdown, with 15 minutes selected."/>
```

> 1.  Refresh the dashboard to get the updated chart

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Refresh the dashboard to get the updated chart.
```

>   These queries execution took about 6+ seconds, to decrease query execution time to sub-seconds it's suggested to use the continuous aggregates, which we will cover in a different section.

Reviewer: Here is where I think the entire caggs digression should go. This should link to the section on caggs if it will be ready for this PR. If not, I think it should temporarily link to the existing caggs how-to guide, rather than promising a different section without delivering yet

Author: done

    
     <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/candlestick/15_min.png" alt="Screenshot of the Grafana variable dropdown."/>

> These queries execution took about 6+ seconds, to decrease query execution time to sub-seconds it's suggested to use the continuous aggregates, which we will cover in a different section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<highlight type="note">
Executing these queries took over 6 to 7 seconds. To decrease the query execution time,
you can pre-aggregate data in
[continuous aggregates](/timescaledb/latest/how-to-guides/continuous-aggregates/).
</highlight>
```

We can change the link target when continuous aggregate instructions are added. I think pointing to the existing material on continuous aggregates, while not very specifically helpful, is better than pointing to content that doesn't exist yet. That makes the tutorial seem unfinished.

Author: totally agree with you

</procedure>

> <highlight type="note">
> To add variables to Grafana and set up new panel, see this [tutorial](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h1eTIYOFplA)
> instead.
> </highlight>
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This seems like a prerequisite, so moved to the prereq section

## Include volume when querying from raw data

> In addition to querying the transaction price of each stock, you can look at the traded volumes of the stock. This shows you how much people are trading a stock in a specified period. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to looking at the price changes for each stock, you can look at its traded volumes.
This shows you how much the stock is being traded during the bucket interval. 
```

The `stock_real_time` hypertable contains a column with the daily cumulative traded volume. You can use this to calculate the volume of data for each bucket. 

> Firstly, you find the maximum `day_volume` value for a symbol within a bucket, then subtract each maximum from the previous bucket's maximum. The difference gives the traded volume for that bucket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, find the maximum `day_volume` value for a symbol within a bucket.
Then, subtract each maximum from the previous bucket's maximum. The
difference gives the traded volume for that bucket.
```

<procedure>

> ### Include volume when querying from raw data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Showing transaction volumes in a candlestick plot
```

1.  Create a new candlestick panel with the following query:
    ```sql

>     SELECT
>     time_bucket('$bucket_interval', time) AS time,
>     symbol,
>     FIRST(price, time) AS "open",
>     MAX(price) AS high,
>     MIN(price) AS low,
>     LAST(price, time) AS "close",
>     MAX(day_volume) - LAG(max(day_volume), 1) over (partition by symbol order by time_bucket('$bucket_interval', time)) AS bucket_volume
>     FROM stocks_real_time
>     WHERE symbol =  $symbol
>     AND time > $__timeFrom()::timestamptz and time < $__timeTo()::timestamptz
>     GROUP BY time_bucket('$bucket_interval', time), symbol;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    SELECT
      time_bucket('$bucket_interval', time) AS time,
      symbol,
      FIRST(price, time) AS "open",
      MAX(price) AS high,
      MIN(price) AS low,
      LAST(price, time) AS "close",
      MAX(day_volume) - LAG(max(day_volume), 1) OVER(
        PARTITION BY symbol
        ORDER BY time_bucket('$bucket_interval', time)
      ) AS bucket_volume
    FROM stocks_real_time
    WHERE symbol =  $symbol
      AND time > $__timeFrom()::timestamptz and time < $__timeTo()::timestamptz
    GROUP BY time_bucket('$bucket_interval', time), symbol;
```

    ```

> 1.  Refresh the dashboard to get the updated chart

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Refresh the dashboard to get the updated chart.
```

</procedure>

> Candlestick charts are a great way to visualize financial data. This tutorial shows you how to u
> se TimescaleDB to generate candlestick values (open, high, low, close) from raw data in a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Candlestick charts are a great way to visualize financial data. This tutorial shows you how to
use TimescaleDB to generate candlestick values (open, high, low, close) from raw data in a
```

>     From the image, we can see the traded volume for this particular time bucket for AMZN stock.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    At the bottom of the plot, you see the trade volume for each time bucket.
```

> hypertable. It also shows you how to query the traded volume for each time interval. 

Reviewer 2: This feels like it should be at the top, or maybe needs an "in conclusion"

Author: yea, just added it.

> Candlestick charts are a great way to visualize financial data. This tutorial showed you how to use TimescaleDB to generate the candlestick values (open, high, low, close) from the raw hypertable. Also, how you can query the traded volume of a particular time bucket. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Candlestick charts are a great way to visualize financial data. This tutorial shows you how to u
se TimescaleDB to generate candlestick values (open, high, low, close) from raw data in a
hypertable. It also shows you how to query the traded volume for each time interval. 
```

> If you want to see other examples of how you can use TimescaleDB and Grafana, check out our tutorials on [Grafana tutorials][grafana-tutorials].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To see other examples of how you can use TimescaleDB and Grafana, check out
all the [Grafana tutorials][grafana-tutorials].
```

*   Is this asset entering bearish or bullish territory?

   <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/candlestick/candlestick_fig.png" alt="Diagram of a candlestick. The open and close prices define the ending positions of a central box. Lines extend from the box to show the high and low prices. The distance between open and close prices is called the real body. The distance between the central box and the high price is the upper shadow, and the distance between the box and the low price is the lower shadow."/>

The figure above shows the structure of a candlestick. A candlestick covers a
specific time interval, for example 5 minutes, 10 minutes, or 1 hour. For this
period, it plots four values:

* **Open**: The starting price
* **Close**: The closing price
* **High**: The highest price
* **Low**: The lowest price

A candlestick chart can show many candlesticks over time. This helps you see
patterns in the changing price of an asset. For example, you can tell whether an
asset is entering bullish or bearish territory, or whether its market activity is
topping or bottoming out.

> ## What you will learn

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

*   [Show transaction volume when querying with raw data](#show-transaction-volumes-in-a-candlestick-plot)

## Prerequisites
Before you begin, make sure you have:

* Installed [Grafana][install-grafana] version&nbsp;8.5 or higher
* Installed [TimescaleDB][install-timescale]
* Imported the stock trade data from the [Getting Started Tutorial][gsg-data]

If you are new to Grafana, see the [Grafana tutorials][grafana-tutorials]
to get familiar with creating your first dashboard and visualizations. Also
see [this tutorial on adding variables to Grafana][variables-tutorial].

The examples in this section use these variables and Grafana functions:
* `$symbol`: a variable used to filter results by stock symbols.
* `$__timeFrom()::timestamptz` & `$__timeTo()::timestamptz`:
  Grafana variables. You change the values of these variables by
  using the dashboard's date chooser when viewing your graph.
* `$bucket_interval`: the interval size to pass to the `time_bucket`
  function when aggregating data.

## Create a candlestick with raw data
Create a candlestick visualization using the raw data in the table `stocks_real_time`.

<procedure>

> ### Create a candlestick with raw data

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Creating a candlestick with raw data
```

  1.  Grafana turns the query into a candlestick chart that 
      looks like this:

       <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/candlestick/1_min.png" alt="Screenshot of a candlestick chart in Grafana, showing the price distribution of $AMZN."/>

       In this first example, we set the $bucket_interval to 1-min, you can see the price of AMZN ranges between $2120 and $2200. This chart uses hyperfunctions to query the `stock_real_time` table, with a bucket interval of 1 minute. 

</procedure>

Retrieving this data took about 7+ seconds, over two weeks of data which is probably slower than most users would expect when analyzing data. This is where continuous aggregates are particularly useful for data-intensive, time-series applications. 

<img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://s3.amazonaws.com/assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/candlestick/raw_data_exec_time.png" alt="Screenshot of the Grafana query response."/>

<procedure>

> 

Reviewer 3: Needs a procedure title

The figure above shows the structure of a candlestick. A candlestick covers a
specific time interval, for example 5 minutes, 10 minutes, or 1 hour. For this
period, it plots four values:

* **Open**: The starting price
* **Close**: The closing price
* **High**: The highest price
* **Low**: The lowest price

A candlestick chart can show many candlesticks over time. This helps you see
patterns in the changing price of an asset. For example, you can tell whether an
asset is entering bullish or bearish territory, or whether its market activity is
topping or bottoming out.

## What you will learn
This tutorial shows you how to:

*   [Create candlestick aggregates with raw data](#create-a-candlestick-with-raw-data)

> *   [Show transaction volume when querying with raw data]
> (#show-transaction-volumes-in-a-candlestick-plot)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
*   [Show transaction volume when querying with raw data](#show-transaction-volumes-in-a-candlestick-plot)
```

* Installed [Grafana][install-grafana] version&nbsp;8.5 or higher
* Installed [TimescaleDB][install-timescale]
* Imported the stock trade data from the [Getting Started Tutorial][gsg-data]

If you are new to Grafana, see the [Grafana tutorials][grafana-tutorials]
to get familiar with creating your first dashboard and visualizations. Also
see [this tutorial on adding variables to Grafana][variables-tutorial].

The examples in this section use these variables and Grafana functions:
* `$symbol`: a variable used to filter results by stock symbols.
* `$__timeFrom()::timestamptz` & `$__timeTo()::timestamptz`:
  Grafana variables. You change the values of these variables by
  using the dashboard's date chooser when viewing your graph.
* `$bucket_interval`: the interval size to pass to the `time_bucket`
  function when aggregating data.

## Create a candlestick with raw data
Create a candlestick visualization using the raw data in the table `stocks_real_time`.

<procedure>

### Create a candlestick with raw data

  1.  In the query editor, use this SQL to query a Candlestick dataset. Use the variable `$bucket interval`
      for the time period covered by each candlestick.
      ```sql

>       SELECT
>           time_bucket($bucket_interval, time) AS time,
>           symbol,
>       FIRST(price, time) AS "open",
>           MAX(price) AS high,
>           MIN(price) AS low,
>           LAST(price, time) AS "close",
>       FROM stocks_real_time
>       WHERE symbol =  $symbol
>           AND time > $__timeFrom()::timestamptz and time < $__timeTo()::timestamptz
>       GROUP BY symbol;

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      SELECT
          time_bucket($bucket_interval, time) AS time,
          symbol,
          FIRST(price, time) AS "open",
          MAX(price) AS high,
          MIN(price) AS low,
          LAST(price, time) AS "close",
      FROM stocks_real_time
      WHERE symbol =  $symbol
          AND time > $__timeFrom()::timestamptz and time < $__timeTo()::timestamptz
      GROUP BY symbol;
```

  1.  Grafana turns the query into a candlestick chart that 
      looks like this:

       <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/candlestick/1_min.png" alt="Screenshot of a candlestick chart in Grafana, showing the price distribution of $AMZN."/>

       In this first example, we set the $bucket_interval to 1-min, you can see the price of AMZN ranges between $2120 and $2200. This chart uses hyperfunctions to query the `stock_real_time` table, with a bucket interval of 1 minute. 

</procedure>

Retrieving this data took about 7+ seconds, over two weeks of data which is probably slower than most users would expect when analyzing data. This is where continuous aggregates are particularly useful for data-intensive, time-series applications. 

<img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://s3.amazonaws.com/assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/candlestick/raw_data_exec_time.png" alt="Screenshot of the Grafana query response."/>

<procedure>

>   With the use of the $bucket_interval variable, we are able to switch intervals. For example, switching to a 15-minute bucket interval gives you this data. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  With the use of the `$bucket_interval` variable, we are able to switch intervals. For example, switching to a 15-minute bucket interval gives you this data. 
```

This tutorial shows you how to:

*   [Create candlestick aggregates with raw data](#create-a-candlestick-with-raw-data)
*   [Show transaction volume when querying with raw data]

> (#showing-transaction-volumes-in-a-candlestick-plot)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(#show-transaction-volumes-in-a-candlestick-plot)
```

### Create a candlestick with raw data

  1.  In the query editor, use this SQL to query a Candlestick dataset using specified bucket interval:

>         ```sql

Reviewer: I think what we meant here (at least what I meant!) is to indent lines that don't start new clauses, rather than indenting the entire statement. Makes it easier to scan the query and identify the important parts! The query further down is an example

      
      <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/candlestick/15_min.png" alt="Screenshot of the Grafana variable dropdown."/>

>   These queries execution took about 6+ seconds, to decrease query execution time to sub-seconds it's suggested to use the timescaledDB continuous aggregates, see our tutorial on [continuous-aggregrate][continuous-aggregrate].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The query execution took more than 6 seconds. To decrease query execution time to sub-seconds, use continuous aggregates. See the how-to guide on [continuous aggregrates][continuous-aggregrate] to learn more.
```

### Showing transaction volumes in a candlestick plot

1.  Create a new candlestick panel with the following query:

>       ```sql

Reviewer: This looked great before actually! The overall indentation isn't necessary

Author: Ah I see, I got it wrong

Author: Just updated, please, can you confirm again?
Sorry for the stress 😊

Reviewer: Sorry for the delay, this question got buried in my GH notifications! Looks great 😄 

No need to apologize! All is good ❤️ and this is really shaping up!
